Python programmers will often
suggests that there are many ways
the language can be used to
solve a particular problem,
but that some are more
appropriate than others.
The best solutions are
celebrated as idiomatic Python,
and there's lots of
great examples on
StackOverflow or other websites.
As a sort of sub-language within Python,
Pandas has its own set of idioms.
We've alluded to some of
these already such as
using vectorization
wherever possible,
and not using iterative loops
if you don't need to.
Several developers and users
within the Pandas community,
have used the term pandorable
for these idioms,
and I think it's a great term.
So I wanted to share with you
a couple of key features of
how you can make your
code more pandorable.
So let's start by bringing in
our Data Processing Library,
so we'll bring in pandas,
And we'll bring in numpy.
We're going to bring in
some timing functionality too,
so I want to demonstrate
something about idiomatic code,
so we'll bring it from
the time at module.
Let's look at some of
our census data from the US.
So this is in the
DataFrame or the dataset,
sorry, datasets/census.csv.
We'll look at the head of that to
remind ourselves what
that looks like.
So the first of the
pandas idioms that I
want to talk about is
called method chaining.
The general idea behind
method chaining is that
every method on object
returns a reference
to that object.
The beauty of this
is that you can
condense many different
operations on a DataFrame,
for instance into one line or
at least one statement of code.
So here's a pandorable way to
write code with method chaining.
In this code, I'm going
to pull out the state and
the city names as
a multiple index,
and I'm going to do so only for
data which has
a summary level of 50,
which in this dataset
is county-level data.
I'm going to rename the column
too just to make it
a bit more readable.
So I'm going to say df.where
the df sub some level equals 50,
then I'm going to drop the NA
that we have from that.
So you see the where
just returned to
DataFrame and I just
called .dropna() on that,
and then I'm going
to set the index,
and I'm going use
a multiple index here.
I want the state name and
the city name to be the index,
and then I'm going to rename
some values and so
the columns I'll
change estimate based 2010 to
something a little bit more
readable, we'll execute that.
So let's walk through this.
First, we use the where function
on the DataFrame and pass in
a Boolean mask which
is only true for
those rows where
the sum level is equal to 50.
This indicates in
our source data,
that the data is summarized
at the county level.
With the result of the where
function evaluated,
we dropped missing values.
Remember that where doesn't
drop missing values by default.
Then we said an index
on the result of that.
In this case, I've set it to
the state name followed
by the county name.
Finally, I rename a column
to make it more readable.
Note that instead
of writing this all
on one line as I could've done,
I began the statement with
the parentheses which
tells Python that I'm
going to expand
that statement over
multiple lines for readability.
Here's a more traditional non
pandorable way of writing this.
There's nothing wrong with
the code in a functional sense.
You might even be
able to understand it
better as a new person
to the language.
It's just not considered as
pandorable as the first example.
So let's create the new
DataFrame from the original,
so df equals df sub df
SUMLEV equals 50.
So here I'm using
the overloaded indexing operator
which drops nans.
So I'm actually doing
a couple of things,
I'm projecting and creating
that Boolean array,
and then I'm using that to
project just certain values
out of the DataFrame,
not a number values are
being dropped automatically,
because that's the shortcut
that's been put in place.
Then I'm going to
update the DataFrame
to have a new index,
and we're going to use in-place
equals true to do this in place.
So df.set index,
and then I'll pass in the
columns I'm interested in,
and then the in-place
equals true tells
the DataFrame to
just modify itself.
Then I'm going to set
the column names,
so I just rename the columns
and this looks pretty
much the same,
and we see we get
a similar result.
So now the key with
any good idiom is to understand
when it isn't helping.
In this case, you
can actually time
both methods to see
which one runs faster.
So we could put the approach
into a function and pass
the function into the time
function to count the time,
the parameter, number
for time it allows us to
choose how many times we want
to actually run that function.
So here I'm just going
to set it to 10.
So let's write a wrapper
for our first function.
So I'm going to define
first approach,
we'll make global DataFrame,
and we'll just paste
our SUM code right in here.
So just to our
pandorable code in here,
and we're just returning all of
that as a result of
that first approach.
I'm going to read
in a new dataset.
So it's nice and fresh.
So df, and remember in
our function we've
made this global df,
and now we're just
going to run it.
So I'm going to call timeit.timeit
pass it the function,
tell it how many times
I wanted to run.
Now let's test the
second approach,
and as you notice we're using
the global variable df
and the function.
However changing
a global variable inside
of a function will modify
the variable even in
a global scope and we
don't want that to
happen in this case.
So for selecting
summary levels of 50 only,
I have created a new DataFrame
for those records.
So let's run this for 10
times and see how it is.
So def second approach and I'll
just paste the code from
the second approach.
You can see that
it's basically the
same as we spoke about,
and then I'm going to
read in a new dataset.
So we'll read this
from the census.csv,
and now let's run it and
do our timing on it.
So timeit.timeit, and we'll pass
in second approach and we'll
run that 10 times as well.
So as you can see the
second approach is much faster,
and so in this
particular example it's
actually a classic time
readability trade off.
You'll see lots of examples
on StackOverflow in
documentation of people using
method chaining in their pandas.
So I think it's really important
for you to be able to read and
understand the syntax and it's
really worth your time
to investigate this.
But keep in mind that
following what appears to be
stylistic idioms might
have performance issues,
and you need to consider
this as well really depends
on the scope of the Data
cleaning you're doing.
Here's another pandas idiom.
Python has a wonderful function
called map which is
a basis for functional
programming in the language.
When you want to
use map and python,
you pass it to
some function you want
called and some
iterable like a list,
then you want the function
to be applied to.
The results of that function
are then called against
each item in the list,
and there's a
resulting list of all
of the evaluations
of that function.
So pandas has something similar,
and it's called apply map,
and then apply map you
provide some function
which should operate on
each cell of the DataFrame,
and the return set is
itself a DataFrame.
Now, I think apply map is
fine but I actually
rarely use it.
Instead, I find myself
often wanting to map across
all of the rows in the
DataFrame not just the cells,
and so pandas actually
has a function that I
use quite heavily
there called apply,
and so let's take
a look at an example.
So let's look at
our census DataFrame.
In this data frame,
we have five columns
for population estimates,
with each column corresponding
with one year of estimates.
It's quite reasonable
to want to create
some new columns for
minimum or maximum values,
and the apply function is
an easy way to do this.
So first we need to write
a function which takes in
a particular row of data,
finds a minimum
and maximum value,
and returns a new row
of data from that.
We'll call this function min-max.
This is pretty straight forward.
We can create
a small slice of a row
by projecting
the population columns,
then we can use NumPy,
min and max functions and
create a new series with
the label values representing
the new value that
we want applied.
So def min-max, and we'll
pass it row and then data,
we're just going to project
the rows that we're
actually interested in
from the data frame.
So from this row,
we're just going to bring in
our population estimates,
and then we're just going
to return a new series.
In this new series,
we're we've got two values
a min and a max,
and we're going to pass in
NumPy min and
the NumPy max from Data.
So then we just need to call
apply on the data frame.
Apply takes the function and
the axis on which to
operate as parameters.
Now, we have to be a bit careful.
We've talked about axes zero
being the rows of
the data frame in the past,
but this parameter is really
a parameter of the index to use.
So to apply across all rows,
which is applying
across all columns,
you can pass an
axis equal to one,
or equal to the word
columns itself.
So df.apply, we push in
our min-max function.
Here I'll set the axis
equal to columns,
and let's look at
the head of this.
Of course, there's
no need to limit
yourself to returning
a new series object.
If you're doing this as
part of data cleaning,
you're likely to find
yourself wanting to
add new data to
the existing data frame.
In that case, you can
just take the row values,
and add in new columns indicating
the max and min scores.
This is a regular part
of my workflow
when bringing in data and
bring building summary,
or descriptive
statistics, and is often
used heavily with
the merging of data frames.
Here's an example where we have
a revised version of
the function min-max.
Instead of returning
a separate series
to display the min and max,
we add two new columns to
the original data frame
to store min.
So I'll just def min-max.
Again, I'm going to bring in
all the population row Data,
and now I'm going to create
a new entry for max.
So I just say row sub max
equals np.max of data,
and then we can create
a new entry for the min as well.
So row sub min
equals np.min(Data),
and then we'll just return row.
So now we actually have all of
our pop estimate data in
the row as well as
our max and our min.
So we just apply this.
Again, we want to say df.apply
passing the function we're
interested in applying,
and then say that we want
this applied across columns.
So apply is an extremely
important tool in your toolkit.
The reason I
introduced apply here,
is because you rarely
see it being used with
actually such large function
definitions like we did,
instead you typically see
it being used with Lambdas.
To get the most out
of this discussion,
and the discussions
that you'll see online,
you're going to need to
know how to read Lambdas.
So you can imagine how you might
chain several apply calls with
lambdas together to create
a readable yet succinct
data manipulation script.
One line example of how
you might calculate
the max of the columns
using the apply function,
is something we're
going to do here.
So I'll bring in the rows,
again these are
my population estimate rows,
and now we'll just apply this
across the data frame
with Lambdas.
So df.apply, and then I
pass into apply Lambda x,
and I just want np.max x sub
rows and then here I'm
saying axis equals one.
I could have said
axis equals column,
one and column are synonymous
and row and zero are Synonymous,
and then we'll take
the head of that.
So this is something
that you'll commonly
see in StackOverflow examples,
or messages, or even the
official documentation.
If you don't remember Lambdas,
just pause the video for
a moment and look up the syntax.
A lambda is just an unnamed
function in Python.
In this case, it takes in
a single parameter x and
returns a single value.
In this case the maximum over
all the columns
associated with row x.
The beauty of the applied
function is that it allows
flexibility in doing
whatever manipulation
that you desire,
as the function you
pass into apply can
be any customized function
that you want.
So let's say we wanted to divide
the states into four categories;
Northeast, Midwest,
South, and West.
We can write customized function
that returns this region
based on the state,
and the state
regions information,
maybe we looked up on Wikipedia.
So here I'll write
a function def get_state_region,
and for the Northeast,
I'll just have a nice big list
of states in the north east,
the Midwest and of course
the most important region,
we'll put in a bunch of
states from the Midwest,
and there's lots of
states here and they're
all very important especially
that third one there.
Then for south, we'll bring
in all the states that we
want in the south region,
and then the states that we
want to bring in from
the west as well.
Then we're just going
to write a little if else.
So if x is in the northeast
return northeast,
if x is in Midwest
return Midwest,
do the same for South,
and we'll do the same for west.
You can imagine that
there's many ways that we
could have written that function.
So now we have
a customized function.
Let's say we want to create
a new column called region,
which shows the state region,
we can use the
customized function
and the apply function to do so.
The customized function
is supposed to work on
the state Name column, STNAME.
So we'll set the apply function
to the state name column,
and pass the customized
function into the Apply.
So here's our example.
We're going to create
a new column in
our data frame
called state region,
we're going to make this
equal to df sub state names,
so we're just projecting
a single columns.
So this isn't series,
but it also has a .apply function.
So we'll call .apply, and
we'll pass in a Lambda,
and that Lambda is
just going to take
whatever value it sees there,
and call the Get
state region to it.
So let's take a look
at those results.
So even though it was a series
that we were working on,
we assign that to
a data frame projections slice.
So that means we've got
our full data frame still.
So we'll take a look
at df sub state name,
and state region and
the head of that.
So we can see here that we have
both the state name and the
state region throughout.
So there are a couple
of pandas idioms,
but I think there's many
more that I haven't
talked about here,
and there's an unofficial
assignment for you.
Go look at some of the top ranked
questions on pandas,
on stack, overflow,
you're going to learn
a lot from that,
and look at how some of
the more experienced authors
answer those questions.
Do you see any
interesting patterns?
Feel free to share
them with others in
the class and myself
so that we can
learn more about what
idiomatic pandas looks like.